# Blog post 3: Simplification of Technology
_An case study of modern technology_<br/><br/>

**By Yves Wienecke** <br />
January 20, 2019

## Simple and clean
One of the goals for companies and engineers in the realm of software and hardware engineering is creating
a product that is easy to understand and use. A tool should make completing a task simple, rather than
complicating a process that may already be difficult. In some instances, dealing with learning how to use
technology is so frustrating and time consuming, that it is dropped. With this in mind, simplifying technology
makes for a better user interface and attracts a wider audience of varying degrees of tech proficiency.

Considering the rate at which technology been developing for the past few decades, it is not entirely uncommon
to come across individuals who feel left behind in an obsolete world. Seniors and people who do not consider 
themselves as tech savy are prone to being left in the dust. A more sensable, intuitive design includes everyone
and makes things 'idiot proof,' that is, very difficult to break or mishandle by accident.

However, the process of simplifying technology means hiding and abstracting certain details of the technology from 
the user. For example, keyless cars provide the simplicity and convenience of starting a commercial automobile
without having to deal with keys. While this streamlines the process of starting a car, it introduces some 
vulnerabilities that are not so intuitive to prevent for users. Along with the practically silent engines of 
hybrid cars, the simplicity of turning _on_ a car has made it simple to forget to turn _OFF_ the car, which has
lead users to experience carbon monoxide poisoning [5]. Additionally, the keyless fobs make it possible for
car jackers to capture the wireless signals to lock and unlock keyless cars, and then relay that signal to 
start the car and drive away.<br /><br />

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/bR8RrmEizVg" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe><br />
[2] _Car jackers relaying key fob signals to steal keyless cars._
<br /><br />

Let's look at some examples whereby companies have made concerning decisions over what details they hide in their
attempts to simplify technology.<br /><br />


## IoT Devices
Internet of Things devices, such as routers, smart televisions, smart refrigerators, and home assistants, are 
widely celebrated as technological achievements. These devices use various sensors and a wifi connection in order
to automate and simplify processes in the home. Smart refrigerators can sense food levels and order new food 
automatically, while home assistants use voice recognition to do things such as set alarms, turn off lights,
play music, or send emails and text-messages.

While these devices make life easy in the house, they are abstractions of complicated wifi networks that hide
many details from the user. If a hacker gets access to an IoT device, there is a clear shot to _other_ devices
due to the interconnection of each device. But even more concerning than that, users of this technology fear
that their devices are using this abstraction to secretly listening to them and collecting their sensitive data. 
While this certainly may or may not be the case, it is nevertheless concering to consider the treatement of 
social media sites like Facebook, and how they sell private user data, regardless of their claims of Privacy. <br /><Br />

## AI
Amazon expressed frustration after failed attempts of developing an AI face recognition software to simplify
the hiring process. While AI and machine learning are powerful tools and the potential for usage is grand,
Usage of this technology hides the details of excactly _how_ it works. Only the input and output data are known
to researchers, and the innerworkings of the technology is not completely understood. This is known as a black box
model [4]. As a result, the AI developed a gender discriminatory approach towards selecting hiring candidates [6].

In other applications of AI and technology, discrimination may occur as a result of a flawed input set. As a 
result, using AI to simplify technology may amplify existing discrimination. Furthermore, this type of machine 
discrimination would be taken as accurate and precise, due to a belief that technology is superior to human
capabilities, so technology is impervious to errors [4]. Of course, this threat is difficult to catch without
understanding the details of the technology.<br /><br />

## Apple, simplicity for a cost
Apple is the main reason for my ruminations on the topic of simplifying technology. The first macintosh came to 
popularity in the mid 1980's and was touted as a simple, user friendly alternative to the complicated Windows
computers. <br /><br />

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/JkU3WCSGSw4" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe><br />
[3] _"It's more sophisticated, yet less complicated. It's more powerful, yet less cumbersome."_<br/>

However, in today's times, Apple has taken a malicious approach to simplifying technology. This is most evident
in the fight between Apple and the Right to Repair movement. In making systems 'idiot proof' and simplified, 
Apple has hidden details from users that force them to spend a large sum of money on repairs or buying a 
completely new system [1].<br /><br />

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/_XneTBhRPYk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe><br />
[1] _Apple witholding information from users to force them to send a lot of money on repairs or buy new._<br /><br />

Apple came under fire for deliberately hindering the performance of older iPhone models in order to 
extend the phones' battery life. While simply replacing the battery would fix the problem, Apple failed to
share any of this information with consumers and continutes to punish those who attempt to repair or modify
Apply products, all under the guise of trying to make technology more simple.<br /><br />

## My thoughts
Again, I am not a Luddite or tech snob against making technology simpler. It is important to make 
technology accessible to everyone, and that happens through education, making intuitive user interface,
and providing excellent user support. Nevertheless, I am not an advocate for simplifying technology
just for the sake of convenience and throwing security or trustworthy business practices to the wind.

I believe that making technology simpler requires users to be aware of what is being simplified and
hidden and the potential ways that it may impact how the technology behaves. For example, AI used for
simplifying caption generation or facial recognition should come with an asterisk that the AI may be
flawed or represent biases inherent in the training data set. With this knowledge, people are still
able to use the technology to simplify tasks, but can take the results with a grain of salt instead of
fostering a preference for the technology's assertions. This may also be addressed by including perspectives
of minority or discriminated groups when simplifying technology, so that assumptions are not made 
about the user and the way in which they will interact with the technology.

In terms of the Internet of Things devices and smart cars, I reaffirm the importance of considering 
whether or not a technology even _NEEDS_ to be simplified. Consumers should consider how necessary it
is to have simplified, sometimes vulnerable technology at their disposal for the sake of a small
amount of convenience. 

Though companies hide nefarious business practices in their simplified technology, like collecting private
user information or reducing performance, there are efforts towards transparency. The GDPR introduced
legislation and serious sactions for companies who do not abide by strict data privacy laws, which 
discrouages misusge of private data. Additionally, users are able to see what kind of information is 
collected about them. This effort seeks to keep software companies in check as they make software and
website sleek and simple.

Ifixit battles against Apple's attempt to abuse simplification of technology. They lobbied for giving 
protections for users trying to repair their devices, and succeeded in getting a law passed [7].
When I see the efforts of these organizations to empower users, I am reminded of the danger of leaving
technology simplification to propritary hands, who may use their power to secretly make a profit at the 
expense of their customers by hiding the details of their technology.


<br /><br /><br /><br />

<hr>

## Sources

[1] CBC News: The International. "Apple under fire for allegations of controversial business practices." *Youtube,* 8 Oct. 2018, [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=\_XneTBhRPYk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_XneTBhRPYk).<Br />

[2] CNN Business. "Watch thieves steal car by hacking keyless tech." *Youtube,* 28 Nov. 2017, [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bR8RrmEizVg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bR8RrmEizVg).<br />

[3] epicyoutubevideos. "Old macintosh ads (1984-85)." *Youtube,* 10 Aug. 2015, [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JkU3WCSGSw4](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JkU3WCSGSw4).<br/>

[4] Introna, Lucas D., David M. Wood. "Picturing Algorithmic Surveillance: The Politics of Facial Recognition Systems." *Surveillance and Society,* vol. 2, no. 2/3, 2002, pp. 177-198.<br />

[5] Valdes-Dapena, Peter. "The danger of keyless cars: What you need to know." *CNNMONEY,* 14 May 2018, [https://money.cnn.com/2018/05/14/autos/key-fob-safety-carbon-monoxide/index.html](https://money.cnn.com/2018/05/14/autos/key-fob-safety-carbon-monoxide/index.html).<br />

[6] Weissmann Jordan. "Amazon Created a Hiring Tool Using A.I. It Immediately Started Discriminating Against Women." *Slate,* 10 Oct. 2018, [https://slate.com/business/2018/10/amazon-artificial-intelligence-hiring-discrimination-women.html](https://slate.com/business/2018/10/amazon-artificial-intelligence-hiring-discrimination-women.html).<br />

[7] Wiens, Kyle. "Copyright Office Ruling Issues Sweeping Right to Repair Reforms." *iFixit,* 25 Oct. 2018, [https://ifixit.org/blog/11951/1201-copyright-final-rule/](https://ifixit.org/blog/11951/1201-copyright-final-rule/).<br />



